Added new IDEs page and started filling it in for PyCharm (#4023)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/How-To-Guides/ROS-2-IDEs.rst

IDEs and Debugging
==================

ROS 2 is not made around a specific development environment and the main focus is on building / running from the command line.

> Nonetheless some IDEs can be used to develop, run and/or debug ROS 2 nodes (with varying success).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nonetheless Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) can be used to develop, run and/or debug ROS 2 nodes.
```

Below are listed some IDEs and instructions on how to use them with ROS 2, if at all possible.

.. contents:: Contents
    :depth: 2
    :local:

General
-------

> 
> .. _InstalledPythonCode:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Installed Python code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Installed Python Code
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When running a node it was typically installed first with ``colcon build [...]``.
For Python code this could mean the source was copied over into the build/install folders.
So when attaching a debugger to a ``ros2 run ...`` command from an opened project, the code being run is not actually the files opened in the project.

It might be best to build with ``symlink-install`` from ``colcon``, such that the original source files are linked instead of copied.

> As an added benefit source code can now be modified and executed without building first.

Reviewer 2: this is already explained here, https://github.com/ros2/ros2_documentation/blob/rolling/source/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-A-Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.rst#build-the-workspace-with-colcon

but for debugging purpose adding this description here again would be better to understand which file needs to be changed.

Author: I added a link for good measure.

> Alternatively, open the source files from the ``build/``/``install/`` directory instead and place breakpoints there.

Reviewer: I think that we should rewrite this section to be more concrete, and lay out the regular installs vs symlink install.  Something like:

```suggestion
By default, when building workspaces with:

.. console::

  colcon build

The Python code will be coped over into the ``build``/``install`` directories.
So when attaching a debugger to a ``ros2 run`` command from within an IDE, the code being run (from the ``build``/``install``) is not the same as the files opened in the IDE project.

There are 2 options to deal with this:

* Open the source files from ``build``/``install`` directory and place breakpoints there.
* Build the workspace with the `--symlink-install <https://colcon.readthedocs.io/en/released/reference/verb/build.html#command-line-arguments>`__ flag to colcon, which will symlink the source files to the ``build``/``install`` directory instead.
```

Author: You're right, this reads better.

Visual Studio Code
------------------

`VSCode <https://code.visualstudio.com/>`_ is a versatile and free development environment.

> See :ref:`Setup ROS2 with VSCode and Docker<VscodeDocker>` for full instructions on how to use VSCode, in combination with Docker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See :doc:`Setup ROS2 with VSCode and Docker<Setup-ROS-2-with-VSCode-and-Docker-Container>` for full instructions on how to use VSCode, in combination with Docker.
```

PyCharm
-------

`PyCharm <https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/>`_ is an IDE specifically for Python.

Of course it can only be meaningfully used for nodes made in Python.

.. note::

>    You can only accomplish integrating running a node directly from Python, not via ``ros2 run ...`` or ``ros2 launch ...``.

Reviewer: Is this note really true?  Down below you have examples on how to attach to a running Python node.

Author: I phrased it poorly. What I mean is, you cannot base a PyCharm run/debug configuration on a real `ros2 ...` command. Instead you have to rely on `python ...`. I wanted to point this out in case that would make a difference for some particular cases.

Maybe this new version is more clear?

Integrate for code inspection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can setup your PyCharm project such that it is fully aware of ROS 2 code, allowing code completion and suggestion.

Linux
"""""

Open a terminal, source ROS and start PyCharm:

.. code-block:: bash

   source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash
   cd ~/dev_ws
   /opt/pycharm/bin/pycharm.sh

After selecting the correct interpreter, everything should work.

.. note::

    This is untested.

Windows
"""""""

First sourcing ROS and then starting PyCharm from the command line seems to have no effect on Windows.
Instead, some settings need to be tweaked.

> #. (Create your ROS workspace as you would normally.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Create your ROS workspace as you would normally.
```

        Trying to run the file will confirm these issues.

#. Under the "Python Interpreters" window, find and select your ROS interpreter.
   Edit the name to something recognizable.
   More importantly, now click the "Show Interpreter Paths" button.
#. In the new window, you will see the paths already associated with this interpreter.
   Click the "+" button and add two more paths (according to your ROS install):

      * ``C:\dev\ros2_humble\bin``
      * ``C:\dev\ros2_humble\Lib\site-packages``

PyCharm will re-index and when finished it should correctly interpret your project, recognising the ROS 2 system packages.
You can navigate through code, get completion and read doc blurbs as expected.

Attach to Process
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Even without any configuration to PyCharm, you can always just attach to a running Python node.
Open your project source and simply run your node as usual:

.. code-block:: bash

   ros2 run my_node main

Then in PyCharm select "Run" > "Attach to Process...".
It might take a second, but a small window should show listing the currently running Python instances, including your node.

> There can be multiple Python processes, so it could some trial-and-error the find the right one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There can be multiple Python processes, so there may be some trial-and-error to find the right one.
```

After selecting an instance, the usual debugging tools are available.
You can pause it or create breakpoints in the code and step through it.

> .. note::
> 
>    The code in your project might not be the files being executed, see :ref:`this<InstalledPythonCode>`.

Reviewer: We already talked about this earlier, so no need to have another note for it.

```suggestion
```

Author: I would rather leave it, because uses don't tend to read full documents. If it was me reading this, I might jump directly to the 'Attaching PyCharm' section, try it and get frustrated. Since the source location seems a common problem, I would point the reader to it explicitly.

Reviewer: OK, we can leave it.

Run/Debug
^^^^^^^^^

Follow the steps for integration first.

Running your Python file from PyCharm will likely result in import errors.

> This is because PyCharm does extend the ``PYTHONPATH`` environment variable, but it leaves ``PATH`` untouched.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because PyCharm extends the ``PYTHONPATH`` environment variable, but it leaves ``PATH`` untouched.
```

> IDEs and Debugging
> ==================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IDEs and Debugging [community-contributed]
==========================================
```

IDEs and Debugging
==================

ROS 2 is not made around a specific development environment and the main focus is on building / running from the command line.
Nonetheless Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) can be used to develop, run and/or debug ROS 2 nodes.

> Below are listed some IDEs and instructions on how to use them with ROS 2, if at all possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below are listed some IDEs and instructions on how to use them with ROS 2.
```

Author: Sure.
Though I think we should also mention IDEs that really just _cannot_ work, to save others some effort.
(I have no idea yet if that will be any at all.)

Reviewer: > (I have no idea yet if that will be any at all.)

Until we have confirmation that there are IDEs that just can't work, I'd like to assume that they will :).

By default, when building workspaces with:

.. code-block:: bash

   colcon build

The Python code will be coped over into the ``build``/``install`` directories.
So when attaching a debugger to a ``ros2 run`` command from within an IDE, the code being run (from the ``build``/``install``) is not the same as the files opened in the IDE project.

There are 2 options to deal with this:

* Open the source files from ``build``/``install`` directory and place breakpoints there.
* Build the workspace with the `--symlink-install <https://colcon.readthedocs.io/en/released/reference/verb/build.html#command-line-arguments>`__ flag to colcon, which will symlink the source files to the ``build``/``install`` directory instead.

Visual Studio Code
------------------

`VSCode <https://code.visualstudio.com/>`_ is a versatile and free development environment.

See :doc:`Setup ROS2 with VSCode and Docker<Setup-ROS-2-with-VSCode-and-Docker-Container>` for full instructions on how to use VSCode, in combination with Docker.

PyCharm
-------

`PyCharm <https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/>`_ is an IDE specifically for Python.

Of course it can only be meaningfully used for nodes made in Python.

> .. note::
> 
>    With PyCharm you can either attach to an existing process (probably started by you via ``ros2 run ...`` or ``ros2 launch ...``) or run the node directly from Python (equivalent to ``python [file.py]``.

Reviewer: This one doesn't feel like a "note" to me, but rather just information that should be inline in the text:

```suggestion
With PyCharm you can either attach to an existing process (probably started by you via ``ros2 run ...`` or ``ros2 launch ...``) or run the node directly from Python (equivalent to ``python [file.py]``).
```

Integrate for code inspection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can setup your PyCharm project such that it is fully aware of ROS 2 code, allowing code completion and suggestion.

Linux
"""""

Open a terminal, source ROS and start PyCharm:

.. code-block:: bash

   source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash
   cd ~/dev_ws
   /opt/pycharm/bin/pycharm.sh

After selecting the correct interpreter, everything should work.

.. note::

    This is untested.

Windows
"""""""

First sourcing ROS and then starting PyCharm from the command line seems to have no effect on Windows.
Instead, some settings need to be tweaked.

#. Create your ROS workspace as you would normally.
#. Start PyCharm normally.

> #. Open a project. This should be the root directory of the ROS node you're developping, e.g. ``~/dev_ws/src/my_node``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Open a project. This should be the root directory of the ROS node you're developing, e.g. ``C:\dev_ws\src\my_node``.
```

(as far as I know, `~` isn't supported on Windows)
